Computation Pipeline
=====================

This page describes the internal four-phase pipeline that executes when you
call :func:`fkcompute.fk`.  Understanding the pipeline helps you choose the
right performance knobs and debug unexpected results.

Overview
--------

A call to :func:`fkcompute.fk` with a braid word and degree passes through
four sequential phases before returning the result dictionary.

**Phase 0 — Parameter setup.**
Input parameters are normalised, presets are merged, and file-saving paths
are resolved.

**Phase 1 — Sign assignment (inversion).**
A valid :math:`\pm 1` sign assignment for the braid strands is determined.
For homogeneous braids this is immediate; for others a parallel search over
sign-assignment candidates is performed.

**Phase 2 — ILP generation.**
The braid topology and sign assignment are translated into a reduced
constraint system, validated for feasibility by Gurobi, and written to a
``.csv`` file for the C++ backend.

**Phase 3 — C++ computation.**
The compiled ``fk_main`` binary reads the ``.csv`` file and evaluates the
FK state sum, accumulating the polynomial coefficients using
arbitrary-precision arithmetic.

**Phase 4 — Assembly and formatting.**
Python reads the JSON output of the binary, attaches metadata (braid used,
sign assignment, component count), optionally converts the result to a
symbolic SymPy expression, and returns the final dictionary.


Phase 0 — Parameter Setup
--------------------------

Before any computation, the :func:`fkcompute.fk` function normalises
parameters:

* Applies the selected **preset** (``"single thread"`` or ``"parallel"``)
  by merging its values into the parameter dict.
* Explicit keyword arguments take precedence over preset values.
* Sets up file-saving paths if ``save_data=True``.

Relevant source: ``src/fkcompute/api/presets.py``.

**Skip logic:**  if you provide an ``ilp_file``, Phases 1 and 2 are skipped
entirely.  If you provide an ``inversion`` dict or ``inversion_file``, only
Phase 1 is skipped.

Phase 1 — Sign Assignment (Inversion)
---------------------------------------

**Goal:** find a valid :math:`\pm 1` sign assignment for each strand segment
of the braid so that the R-matrix equations are satisfiable.

Entry point: :func:`fkcompute.inversion.api.find_sign_assignment`.

Braid Type Detection
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The function first classifies the braid:

* **Homogeneous:** every braid generator :math:`\sigma_k` appears with a
  consistent sign throughout the word.  The sign assignment is then
  determined analytically and computed immediately — no search required.
* **Non-homogeneous (fibered):** at least one generator appears with mixed
  signs.  A parallel search is performed.

Parallel Search (Non-Homogeneous Braids)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The search, implemented in
:func:`fkcompute.inversion.search.parallel_try_sign_assignments`, proceeds
as follows:

1. **Braid variants** — cyclic shifts and (optionally) horizontal reflections
   of the braid word are generated by
   :func:`fkcompute.inversion.variants.generate_braid_variants`.

2. **Permutation candidates** — for each variant, a set of sign-assignment
   candidates is derived from the *sign diagram* of the braid (a combinatorial
   structure encoding which strand-crossing patterns are compatible).  Candidates
   are generated by
   :func:`fkcompute.inversion.permutations.iter_perms_rot_closed`.

3. **Parallel evaluation** — candidates are distributed across Python
   worker processes (``max_workers``) in chunks of ``chunk_size``.  Each
   worker tests its batch by calling the constraint reducer and the Gurobi
   ILP checker.

4. **Early exit** — as soon as one worker finds a valid assignment, the
   remaining workers are cancelled.

Performance knobs:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 20 80

   * - Parameter
     - Effect
   * - ``max_workers``
     - Number of Python processes.  Set to ``cpu_count`` for maximum
       throughput.
   * - ``chunk_size``
     - Candidates per task.  Smaller values increase responsiveness to an
       early hit; larger values reduce inter-process overhead.
   * - ``include_flip``
     - Whether to include reflected braid variants.  Roughly doubles the
       search space; may help for certain knot types.
   * - ``max_shifts``
     - Cap on the number of cyclic shifts tried.

Phase 2 — Constraint System and ILP Generation
------------------------------------------------

**Goal:** translate the braid topology and sign assignment into a constraint
system that the C++ backend can use.

Entry point: internal helper ``_generate_ilp`` in
``src/fkcompute/api/compute.py``.

Steps:

1. **Relation generation** —
   :meth:`fkcompute.domain.braid.states.BraidStates.get_state_relations`
   generates the full list of constraints (equalities, inequalities,
   conservation laws) implied by the R-matrix structure.

2. **Constraint reduction** —
   :func:`fkcompute.domain.constraints.reduction.full_reduce` applies
   fixed-point propagation: alias substitution, constant propagation, and
   variable elimination.  This dramatically reduces the number of free
   variables.

3. **Symbolic assignment** — the reduced system is solved symbolically,
   expressing each state in terms of a small number of independent
   integer variables (the "free variables").

4. **ILP feasibility check** — Gurobi verifies that the system has at least
   one bounded integer solution.  This step catches degenerate cases before
   invoking the expensive C++ computation.

5. **ILP file generation** —
   :func:`fkcompute.solver.ilp.ilp` writes the constraint data to a ``.csv``
   file in a custom format expected by the C++ backend.

Phase 3 — C++ Computation
---------------------------

**Goal:** evaluate the FK state sum and accumulate polynomial coefficients.

Entry point: :func:`fkcompute.infra.binary.run_fk_binary`.

The Python layer executes the ``fk_main`` binary as a subprocess:

.. code-block:: bash

   fk_main <ilp_base> <output_base> --threads N

**Binary resolution:**

1. If ``fk_main`` is on ``PATH``, that binary is used.
2. Otherwise the packaged binary at ``fkcompute/_bin/fk_main`` is used.

**Inside the binary:**

* Reads the ``.csv`` constraint file produced in Phase 2.
* Uses **OpenMP** to parallelise the outer loop over state assignments.
* Accumulates the FK polynomial using **FLINT** arbitrary-precision
  arithmetic.
* Writes the result to ``<output_base>.json``.

See :doc:`cpp_backend` for details on the C++ architecture.

Phase 4 — Assembly and Formatting
-----------------------------------

After the binary finishes, Python:

1. Reads ``<output_base>.json``.
2. Augments ``metadata`` with:

   * ``braid`` — the braid word actually used.
   * ``inversion`` — the sign assignment found in Phase 1.
   * ``components`` — number of link components (from
     :class:`fkcompute.domain.braid.states.BraidStates`).

3. If ``symbolic=True`` and SymPy is available, computes and attaches a
   pretty-printed polynomial string as ``metadata["symbolic"]``.

4. If ``save_data=False`` (the default), deletes the intermediate
   ``_inversion.json``, ``_ilp.csv``, and ``.json`` files.

5. Returns the result dictionary to the caller.


Progress Callbacks (Interactive Mode)
--------------------------------------

When the interactive wizard is active, the internal
:func:`fkcompute.api.compute._fk_compute` function accepts a private
``_progress_callback`` argument — a
:class:`fkcompute.interactive.progress.FKProgressTracker` instance.

The tracker receives start/update/complete events from each phase and
renders live progress panels in the terminal using Rich.
