Troubleshooting
===============

This page covers common error conditions and how to resolve them.

Installation Issues
-------------------

CMake Cannot Find FLINT
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: text

   CMake Error: Could not find FLINT.

Install FLINT for your platform:

.. code-block:: bash

   # macOS
   brew install flint

   # Ubuntu/Debian
   sudo apt-get install libflint-dev

   # RHEL/Fedora
   sudo yum install flint-devel

If FLINT is installed in a non-standard location, set ``CMAKE_PREFIX_PATH``:

.. code-block:: bash

   pip install . --config-settings="cmake.args=-DCMAKE_PREFIX_PATH=/opt/flint"

OpenMP Not Found (macOS)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

On macOS, the system Clang does not include OpenMP by default.  Install the
``libomp`` runtime via Homebrew:

.. code-block:: bash

   brew install libomp

Then reinstall the package:

.. code-block:: bash

   pip install --force-reinstall .

``fk_main`` Binary Not Found
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: text

   FileNotFoundError: fk_main binary not found

The compiled binary is missing from ``fkcompute/_bin/``.  This usually means
the C++ build step failed silently during ``pip install``.

Check the build log:

.. code-block:: bash

   pip install . -v 2>&1 | grep -i "error\|warning\|cmake"

Then rebuild manually:

.. code-block:: bash

   cmake -B build -S .
   cmake --build build
   cp build/fk_main src/fkcompute/_bin/fk_main

Gurobi Errors
--------------

No Gurobi Licence Found
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: text

   gurobipy.GurobiError: No Gurobi license found.

If you did not install the optional ILP dependency, install it first:

.. code-block:: bash

   pip install ".[ilp]"

Set the ``GRB_LICENSE_FILE`` environment variable to the path of your
``gurobi.lic`` file:

.. code-block:: bash

   export GRB_LICENSE_FILE=/home/user/gurobi.lic

Add this to your shell profile for persistence.

If you do not yet have a licence, Gurobi offers two free options that are
both sufficient for typical **fkcompute** computations:

* **Limited free licence** — no registration required; covers the constraint
  sizes generated by fkcompute for most knots and links at moderate degrees.
  Obtain it via ``grbgetkey`` after installing Gurobi, or from the
  `Gurobi free trial page <https://www.gurobi.com/free-trial/>`_.
* **Academic licence** — full-size, unrestricted; free for faculty, students,
  and staff at degree-granting institutions.  Apply at the
  `Gurobi academic programme page <https://www.gurobi.com/academia/academic-program-and-licenses/>`_.

Gurobi Licence Has Expired
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Renew your licence at `the Gurobi website <https://www.gurobi.com/>`_ and replace
the ``gurobi.lic`` file.

Computation Errors
------------------

Inversion Search Returns No Result
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: text

   InversionResult(success=False, ...)

The sign-assignment search did not find a valid assignment at the given
degree.  This can happen when:

1. **The degree is too low** for the constraint system to be satisfiable.
   Try increasing the degree.

2. **The search space was limited** by ``max_shifts`` or ``max_workers=1``.
   Run with more workers and no shift limit:

   .. code-block:: python

      result = fk(braid, degree, max_workers=8, max_shifts=None, include_flip=True)

3. **The braid is not a fibered knot** at this degree — some invariants are
   only defined above a threshold degree.

To inspect what was tried:

.. code-block:: python

   from fkcompute.inversion.api import find_sign_assignment

   inv = find_sign_assignment(braid, degree, max_workers=4, verbose=True)
   print(inv.success, inv.braid_type)

ILP Infeasibility
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: text

   Gurobi: Infeasible

The constraint system generated from the inversion data has no integer
solution.  This usually means the sign assignment found in Phase 1 is not
compatible with the degree.  Possible causes:

* The inversion was loaded from a file generated at a different degree.
  Make sure ``inversion_data`` matches the current ``degree``.
* A manually supplied ``inversion`` is incorrect.  Verify the sign values.

Memory Errors in the C++ Backend
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For very high degrees (≥ 10) with many-strand braids, the C++ backend may
exhaust memory.  Mitigations:

* Reduce the number of threads (reduces peak memory from parallel buffers).
* Run on a machine with more RAM.
* Use intermediate save points: save the ILP file, then run the binary
  separately with ``ulimit -v`` to diagnose memory usage.

SymPy Not Available
--------------------

.. code-block:: text

   ImportError: SymPy is required for symbolic output functionality.

Install SymPy:

.. code-block:: bash

   pip install sympy
   # or
   pip install "fkcompute[symbolic]"

YAML Not Available
-------------------

.. code-block:: text

   ImportError: PyYAML is required to load .yaml config files.

Install PyYAML:

.. code-block:: bash

   pip install PyYAML
   # or
   pip install "fkcompute[yaml]"

Large Coefficient Strings
--------------------------

.. code-block:: text

   ValueError: Coefficient too large for symbolic computation: 12000 digits.

Very high-degree computations produce coefficients with thousands of digits
that SymPy cannot handle in a reasonable time.  Options:

* Use the raw ``result["terms"]`` data directly.
* Work numerically: evaluate the polynomial at specific values of :math:`q`.
* Reduce the degree.

Verbose Logging
----------------

Enable verbose logging to see per-phase progress:

.. code-block:: python

   result = fk(braid, degree, verbose=True)

.. code-block:: bash

   fk simple "[1,-2,1,-2]" 3 --verbose

Log messages are prefixed with ``[DEBUG]`` or ``[WARNING]`` and written to
stderr.

Reporting Bugs
---------------

Please report issues at the project issue tracker, including:

* The exact braid word and degree.
* The full error traceback.
* Output of ``pip show fkcompute`` and ``python --version``.
* Platform and OS version.
